# FT232H-FPGA-DDS-interface
FPGA controls a DDS, AD9959 for fast and precisely timed generation of frequencies upto 250 MHz.

To control the precisely timed generation of RF, an FPGA is utilized to control a DDS. The FPGA communicates using 4-lane SPI bus to the AD9959 in order to drive the DDS in various modes
available, eg. linear sweep, single tone as described [here](https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-documentation/data-sheets/AD9959.pdf).

In order to synchronize the DDS clock with the SPI clock, we generate the clock from the FPGA that is fed to the DDS ref clock. The SPI clock runs at 125 MHz which takes 2 clocks (8ns) 
for transfer of 1 Byte of data in the 4-lane SPI mode.

The FPGA used for this purspose is CMOD A7 from [Digilent](https://reference.digilentinc.com/reference/programmable-logic/cmod-a7/start). Any other FPGA can be used, I picked this one mainly because it was cheap + it has a lot block RAM.

The frequency profiles and mode settings are stored in the BRAM of the FPGA which is transferred on demand at a very high speed with hardware timing which is the key requirement for generation of precisely timed RF.

These frequency profiles and the mode data are transferred from a computer. To match with the timings, we need to transfer the data at a very high speed to the FPGA. For this, I used an FT232H board to obtain full speed USB 2.0 communication speed (480Mbps). However, there is an FT2232H chip available on the Digilent FPGA board, but it is not wired in the way I want -- they have used one port as a JTAG programmer and other for data transfer but in a slow UART speed:( . The FT232H chip is configured to run in a synchronous parallel data transfer mode. In this mode 8 pins are toggled at 60 MHz giving a maximum of 480 Mbps theoretical speed. I obtain a speed around 30-40 MBps (MBytes/s) depending on the payload which is good enough. The FPGA is configured to read the FT232H data synchronously using the clock from the FT board. The data is then transferred to the BRAM (which again, runs with the FT clock). BRAM is used in dual port mode which allows for reading of the data at a different clock (125MHz, this is the clock used to transfer the data to DDS). Since, the data is transferred only in the beginning, that leaves no conflict between when the DDS is controlled. The depth of the BRAM is above 28000 words (each word containing 64bits). In such setting, data for about 56000 new frequencies can be transfered in about 11ms.

The schematic of the fT232H + FPGA + DDS is depicted [here](https://github.com/mdnoaman/FT232H-FPGA-DDS-interface/blob/main/AD9959_FPGA_FT232H_schematics.png)

I set up two different modes of operation for the driving of the DDS:

Mode 1. The idea is to generate fast jumping of frequency between multiple values. In such mode, after detecting a TTL trigger, the FPGA starts to drive the DDS to drive different 
frequencies for a predefined time. In particular, we begin with a single frequency which starts to "split" between two by jumping up and down about the center frequency. The initial splitting gap is very small which is linearly increased so that the splitting becomes very smooth. After certain predefined time, the splitting rate can be changed. These steps woudl make the final splitting profile look pretty much non-linear in a piecemeal linear fashion. After certain time or TTL event, further splitting can be started. The splitting can reversibly merg back or even cross over. Such frequency splitting has immediate usage in cold atom experiments where atoms trapped in a so called dipole trap can be split and merged (or even collided). This [file](https://github.com/mdnoaman/FT232H-FPGA-DDS-interface/blob/main/Scope_24.png) depicts how the splitting occurs from two to 4 frequency values. The overall splitting profile is measured in this [graph](https://github.com/mdnoaman/FT232H-FPGA-DDS-interface/blob/main/FPGA-DDS-output-20200708.png).

Mode2. In this mode the RF is swept up and down rapidly in a general shape, called as sawtooth sweep. After generation of certain number of such sawtooth sweeps, an entirely new sawtooth profile can be initiated. The sequence can be extended for generation of 9000 completely new sawtooth profiles. The sweitching from one profile to the next is also achieved by external trigger. However, the external trigger only comes in effect when the onging sweep is completed. This is deliberately done so that the unwanted jump in the frequency is avoided. These images [here](https://github.com/mdnoaman/FT232H-FPGA-DDS-interface/blob/main/IMG_20210429_164436.jpg), [here](https://github.com/mdnoaman/FT232H-FPGA-DDS-interface/blob/main/LeCroy--00030.jpg) show how the frequency sweeps for different durations/external triggers.



Mode3. Here we drive the DDS to output interlaced frequencies. In some cases it is desirable to produce multiple RF at one time, eg. trapping cold atoms and simultaneously moving them around. Such task is usually performed by an arbitrary function generator where one can continuously write associated amplitude words to a fast DAC. This way any signal can be generated by writing individual amplitude values rapidly. However, the operation of such devices come with a cost of continuous data transfer at very high speed. Usually, a dedicated CPU is utilized along with and FPGA+DAC system. Another drawback is when driving an AOM or AOD (to split optical beam), a simultaneous multiple RF frequency can create unwanted intereference. The situation becomes very challenging in particular, when the amplitude and the freuqency of each of RF components is dynamically altered in order to controllably move the atomic cloud.
In this project, I drive the DDS in interlaced manner in which the RF components jump between a set of predefined values alternately. If the interlacing is fast enough the output may look like multiple frequencies being generated at the same time. In this we can we interlace with a time duration of 2us (it can be operated even more fast below 500ns). For atomic motional dynamics, 2us is fast enough that the atoms wouldn't register the modulation and they would experience an average potential. However, due to interlacing, each of the frequency gets an additional broadening of 1/(2us) = 0.5 MHz. This can be ignored for certain situations. [This figure](https://github.com/mdnoaman/FT232H-FPGA-DDS-interface/blob/main/Cloud_splitting.png) is an example of how the RF and the beam deflection can be generated over time. 


